GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff here
in Iowa for our special coverage
of tonight's
presidential caucuses.
We will be looking at the role
of evangelicals
in shaking out this crowded
Republican field.
PASTOR KENNEY LINHART, The
Cathedral: You
want to see things change in
Iowa? Do you
want to see the glory of God
come down to
Iowa? Then you need to be
involved in the
political process.
GWEN IFILL: And we talk with Amy
Walter and
Tamara Keith about what's
happening on the
ground as candidates make their
final push.
Plus, David Brooks and Michelle
Cottle are
here to analyze the race.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: It's finally here,
caucus night
in Iowa.
People will gather at sites all
over the state
to cast the first actual votes
of the 2016
presidential election year. It
comes after
endless months of campaigning
and more than
$200 million spent on ads. The
potential payoff?
Forty-four delegates for
Democrats, 30 for
Republicans, and bragging
rights.
Judy and the "NewsHour" team are
on the ground
in the Hawkeye State tonight --
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Gwen, the
candidates we're
watching on this final day are
also chasing
another precious commodity,
momentum. And
so the focus in these final
hours for them
is on making sure anybody who is
leaning or
committed shows up when and
where they're
needed.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
Thank you so much. Thanks for
all your help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Most candidates
were on the
ground here in Iowa one last
time today, making
one last pitch to voters who may
not have
made up their minds, and urging
those already
on their side to turn out
tonight.
On the Democratic side, Bernie
Sanders is
facing the question, will his
supporters,
many of them first-timers to the
caucuses,
show up? He revved up volunteers
in Des Moines
today.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
So what is our job today? It's
to make sure
we have the highest voter
turnout possible.
That happens, we win. Let's go
get them. Thank
you all.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
was also in
Des Moines. With pastries in
hand, she cheered
her volunteers through their
last-minute push.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Thank you. We will do it
together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In late polls,
Clinton has
a small advantage. But with
Sanders well ahead
in next week's New Hampshire
primary, Clinton's
feeling the pressure here.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Come
caucus for me
tonight. OK?
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the Republican
side, Donald
Trump is also relying on
first-time caucus-goers
for support. He made his plea
today in Waterloo
in Northeastern Iowa.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We are leading all the polls and
we're leading
in Iowa, but it doesn't mean
anything. You
have got to go out tonight and
caucus. Hopefully,
tonight, we're going to have the
beginning
of what is going to be in a
certain way a
very positive revolution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump has opened
up a lead
in recent polls on his closest
rival, Ted
Cruz. But the Texas senator is
hoping his
campaign's organization and
outreach to evangelicals
will work in his favor.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
We have now been to all 99
counties in the
great state of Iowa. This is our
final stop
on caucus day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marco Rubio,
who's polling
third here, has been tamping
down expectations,
even as he works overtime.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: We recognize
we're not the
front-runner. We know we are an
underdog,
but we feel good about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The candidates
who've struggled
in Iowa aren't even sticking
around for the
caucuses.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
If I do well in New Hampshire,
everybody's
going to know who I am.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Kasich,
staking his campaign
on the New Hampshire primary,
was there through
the weekend.
And while Jeb Bush and Chris
Christie were
here earlier today, both will be
following
caucus results from the Granite
State.
There is one more wild card: the
weather.
Much of Iowa is in for a winter
storm in the
hours just ahead. Whatever
tonight's results,
the presidential race is heading
into new
turbulence all its own.
GWEN IFILL: Hi there, Judy.
You and I combined have covered
our share
of Iowa caucus nights, but this
one seems
more mysterious, more kind of
amazing and
unpredictable than ever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're right.
You and I both covered these
Iowa caucuses
before. And I can remember some
really unpredictable
ones in the past, but, Gwen,
nothing like
this.
When we're on the Republican
side, you have
a man who never served in public
office before
running for the highest office
in the land,
and he's been leading in the
polls ever since
he first got into the race.
That's Donald
Trump. The question tonight, of
course, as
everybody has been saying, is,
can he translate
that enthusiasm into getting
people to show
up to their local schoolhouse,
their church,
or wherever these caucuses take
place and
get them to stand there and
stand up and say,
I'm for Donald Trump?
On the Democratic side, just as
unpredictable,
Hillary Clinton, the favorite,
and yet Bernie
Sanders, the one Democratic
socialist in the
U.S. Senate, is giving her a run
for the money.
And the question is the same
there. Can he
turn that enthusiasm into votes?
GWEN IFILL: It seems like all
the conventional
wisdom is out the window
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it really
is.
And, you know, I just heard the
most revered
pollster in the state say, Ann
Selzer, says
that she -- when people say what
are the issues
in this campaign, she said there
really haven't
been issues, especially on the
Republican
side. She said, this is an
election about
mood and about who can take the
country to
the next level, to the future.
And so she compared it -- she
said, this is
an election that stands alone.
And I think
we will see tonight if that
turns out to be
the case.
GWEN IFILL: Good to see you on
the campus
of Drake University in Des
Moines tonight.
Thanks, Judy.
Judy will be back with a closer
look at the
key voters who could determine
tonight's outcome
after the news summary.
The World Health Organization
today declared
the Zika virus an international
public health
emergency. The mosquito-borne
disease has
been linked to birth defects in
the Americas
involving babies born with
abnormally small
heads, or microcephaly.
In Geneva today, Margaret Chan,
director general
of the WHO, issued a call for
action.
DR. MARGARET CHAN, Director
General, World
Health Organization: The
committee advised
that the causes of microcephaly
and other
neurological complications
constitute an extraordinary
event and a public health threat
to other
parts of the world. In their
view, a coordinated
international response is
needed.
GWEN IFILL: The WHO says
restrictions on foreign
travel and trade are not needed
yet, but it's
advising pregnant women in
affected countries
to take steps to prevent
mosquito bites.
In Afghanistan, new violence
underscored the
government's struggle to
safeguard its own
capital. A suicide bomber blew
himself up
at a police headquarters in
Kabul, killing
at least 20 people and wounding
nearly 30
more. The Interior Ministry said
the Taliban
attacker detonated the bomb as
he waited in
line to enter the facility. Most
of those
killed and injured were
civilians.
The U.N.'s special envoy for
Syria announced
today the official start of
talks aimed at
ending the country's civil war.
That came
after a meeting with the main
opposition group,
the High Negotiations Committee,
or HNC, in
Geneva. It wants an end to the
sieges and
starvation of Syrian towns.
STAFFAN DE MISTURA, Special
United Nations
Envoy for Syria: We are actually
listening
with attention to the concerns
of HNC. And
we are going to tomorrow discuss
and listen
to the concerns of the
government. The discussions
are starting, but, meanwhile,
the challenge
is now, let's also have those
who have the
capacity of discussing this at a
different
level time to discuss about
cease-fire.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile, the U.S.
envoy charged
with fighting the Islamic State
was in Northern
Syria over the weekend.
Brett McGurk is the first senior
U.S. official
to set foot in Syria since
August of 2014.
He met with a variety of groups
battling the
militants, and said ISIS forces
do not stand
a chance.
Back in this country, newly
released documents
shed a bit more light on last
may's Amtrak
crash in Philadelphia. Eight
people died and
nearly 200 were hurt. Interview
transcripts
show the engineer, Brandon
Bostian, saying
he remembers trying to pick up
speed, then
hitting the brakes when the
train hit a sharp
curve, going too fast.
But lawyers for the victims said
they don't
believe him.
ROBERT MONGELUZZI, Attorney:
There was no
problem with the signals, no
problem with
the tracks, no problem with the
locomotive,
no problem with the brakes. And
what we have
learned is, the problem was
Brandon Bostian.
We believe that his inconsistent
story speaks
volumes about him and his
credibility and
believability at trial.
GWEN IFILL: The National
Transportation Safety
Board says it has not yet
reached any conclusions
about the cause of the crash.
And on Wall Street, stocks
struggled to hold
their own after a new plunge in
oil prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 17 points
to close below 16450. The Nasdaq
rose six
points, and the S&P 500 dropped
a fraction
of a point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how the evangelical
vote can make or break GOP
candidates and
why Republicans are revolting
against the
establishment; plus, full
analysis of the
Iowa caucuses from David Brooks,
Michelle
Cottle, and our Politics Monday
duo.
Almost every presidential
election produces
a bloc of voters who become a
barometer for
the outcome. On Friday, we
looked at the role
women voters of different ages
will play in
the Democratic caucuses here in
Iowa.
Tonight, we look at a bloc of
voters who will
help foretell results on the
Republican side.
In some ways, yesterday was just
like any
other Sunday at The Kathedral,
an evangelical
Christian church in Iowa's
capital, Des Moines.
Worshipers came together for a
morning of
prayer and enthusiastic song.
But when it came time for the
sermon, Pastor
Kenney Linhart left no doubt
what he expects
his congregates to do come
Monday night.
PASTOR KENNEY LINHART, The
Kathedral: You
want to see things change in
Iowa? Do you
want to see the glory of God
come down to
Iowa? Then you need to be
involved in the
political process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Only a fraction
of Iowa voters
typically go to caucus. But of
those who attend
on the Republican side, half are
expected
to be evangelical, or born-again
Christians.
Iowa pollster Ann Selzer says,
even as her
latest survey shows Donald Trump
leading among
Republicans overall, Ted Cruz is
ahead among
evangelicals.
J. ANN SELZER, President, Selzer
& Company:
We see surprises all the time
coming from
the evangelical vote and that's
why you have
to look at Ted Cruz and his
ability to organize
that group as a potential
surprise on caucus
night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was
evangelicals who helped
propel Mike Huckabee in 2008 and
Rick Santorum
four years ago to victory here.
This year,
not only are Huckabee and
Santorum competing
for those votes. So is a cluster
of other
Republicans.
Radio Iowa's O. Kay Henderson:
O. KAY HENDERSON, News Director,
Radio Iowa:
Nine months ago, Rand Paul was
trying to lock
in evangelical supporters. You
have Ben Carson,
who has really kept a core of
support, and
that comes from the states'
evangelical churches.
You have Donald Trump, who has
lined up an
important endorsement from the
president of
Liberty University. And you have
Ted Cruz,
who has an effort to try to get
a pastor in
each precinct in Iowa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the former
chairman of
the Iowa Republican Party, Matt
Strawn, says
the evangelical voters these
candidates are
after don't all have the same
priorities.
MATT STRAWN, Former Iowa
Republican Party
Chairman: Take a look at Ted
Cruz. Part of
his coalition with people like
Bob Vander
Plaats, radio personality Steve
Deace, very
anti-establishment evangelical
Christians,
the type that want to blow up
the system and
start over, as opposed to maybe
a larger group
of Iowa Christian conservatives
that would
be the progeny of the Pat
Robertson movement
in the 1980s, Ralph Reed
Christian Coalition,
more pragmatic Christian
conservatives who
want to work within the system
to shape it
towards their beliefs.
And they're the folks that are
your traditional
caucus-goers that are still
largely up for
grabs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This latter
group, Strawn says,
have elected mainstream
Republicans to office
here for years. But that's
exactly what Christian
conservative leader Bob Vander
Plaats says
he doesn't want to see this
time. He's backing
Cruz.
BOB VANDER PLAATS, CEO, The
Family Leader:
We trust conversions on the road
to Damascus.
We question conversions on the
road to Des
Moines. And so we take a look
at, what were
they doing before they ran for
president?
And so, at age 13, you know,
he's memorizing
the Constitution. He's deeply
threaded with
the Judeo-Christian world view.
SEN. TED CRUZ: What I want to
ask of each
of you is that you pray just a
minute a day,
that you say, father God,
continue this awakening,
continue this spirit of revival.
Awaken the
body of Christ.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The divide has
grown into a
kind of internal war. Another
prominent voice
inside Iowa's Christian
conservative community,
Pastor Jamie Johnson, says Cruz
has hit a
ceiling within the group.
PASTOR JAMIE JOHNSON,
Cornerstone World Outreach:
It could be his personality,
that he naturally
seems to rub people the wrong
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Johnson, who
pastored churches
for 25 years, believes Trump
could surprise
everyone tonight.
PASTOR JAMIE JOHNSON: I would
say that Iowa's
evangelicals are cautious, but
excited about
the possibility of a President
Trump. And
they feel that he may have the
iron will that
is necessary to do a lot of the
things that
have frustrated Iowa
evangelicals and probably
evangelicals across the nation
for many years
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bob Vander Plaats
couldn't
disagree more.
BOB VANDER PLAATS: He's a guy
that says he
doesn't have to ask God for
forgiveness. He's
a guy that disparages prisoners
of war by
saying, "I like veterans who
aren't captured."
He's a guy who mocks people with
disabilities.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
My mother gave me this Bible,
this very Bible,
many years ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kathedral's
Kenney Linhart
questions Trump's sincerity.
PASTOR KENNEY LINHART: How
tattered are the
pages of that Bible? And how
much of that
Bible does he know?
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Pastor Jamie
Johnson argues
many Iowa evangelicals are even
more focused
on finding a strong leader for
the country
and someone who can win in
November.
PASTOR JAMIE JOHNSON: I think
there's a willingness
on the part of many self
described born-again
Christians that are willing to
take a chance
on Trump, and pray that God will
guide him
in a moral and ethical
direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Johnson defends
Trump's expressions
of faith, as do voters like
Kathy Simpson,
who showed up yesterday to hear
Trump speak
in Council Bluffs.
KATHY SIMPSON, Trump Supporter:
There are
people who don't think Trump is
a religious
person. I know that he is a
religious person.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some who belong
to Pastor Linhart's
church have a different take.
Several brought
up Trump calling a New Testament
book 2 Corinthians.
DONALD TRUMP: 2 Corinthians
3:17, that's the
whole ball game.
LIZZIE MONROE, Church Member: If
he can't
pronounce the Bible verse the
correct way,
it doesn't give me a lot of
faith. I mean,
my 2-year-old knows how to say a
Scripture.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brenda McGinnis
is enthusiastically
for Marco Rubio.
BRENDA MCGINNIS, Rubio
Supporter: I have heard
him talk about his salvation. I
have heard
him use the name of Jesus
Christ, which is
very important to me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Rubio spoke about
his faith
to a crowd near Des Moines this
weekend.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: You better
hope that my
that my faith influences me,
because I'm a
follower of Jesus Christ. And
Jesus Christ
taught us that, in order to
follow him, we
have to care and love for one
another.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pastor Linhart
likes what he
hears.
PASTOR KENNEY LINHART: Marco
Rubio has come
out so well with his faith so
strong, not
just said he is a Christian, but
that he believes
that the word of God should
direct his life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Whether it's the
deciding factor
or not in the Republican
contest, Pastor Linhart
believes it's critical for the
Christian community
to make its voice heard.
PASTOR KENNEY LINHART: As you go
about this
election cycle tomorrow night,
you pray and
ask that God shows you the men
and women who
are subjected to his spirit,
because if God
is going to change the nation,
he's going
to do it through human vessels.
GWEN IFILL: Now to Politics
Monday. And what
a big Monday it is.
And back to Judy in Iowa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Earlier today, I
spoke with
someone who knows Iowa politics
as well as
anybody. He is Republican Chuck
Grassley,
who has served as this state's
senior U.S.
senator for the last 35 years.
I asked him what he makes of
Donald Trump's
appeal in his home state.
SEN. CHARLES GRASSLEY (R), Iowa:
It's a wakeup
call to everybody in the
Republican -- who
could be our nominee, and you
have kind of
got to not worry so much about
his political
philosophy, right or left. You
have got to
see him as a messenger and the
frustration
that the American people have,
and whoever
is our candidate has to respond
to that frustration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're completely
comfortable
if Ted Cruz were to pull off a
win here?
SEN. CHARLES GRASSLEY: I think
the best way
to answer your question is that
I don't want
a third term of an Obama
presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With that
lead-in, I'm joined
here in Iowa by Tamara Keith of
NPR and Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report.
Here we are. We're on the
ground. The day
has come.
But, Amy, it is really
interesting to see
how a senior Republican in the
state of Iowa,
Chuck Grassley, is reacting to
this extraordinary
field of candidates for
president this year.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: That
is exactly right. There are a
couple of things
going on. First, Chuck Grassley
is up for
reelection this year. He doesn't
have competition
yet.
But so many Republicans who
dismissed the
idea early onñ of the Tea Party
or who said
that these aren't people who
turn out and
vote, they were swamped in
previous elections.
So he's learned his lesson, to
say you can't
dismiss what is potentially
another bubbling
movement.
And I hear that a lot too from
folks maybe
who don't want to see Donald
Trump win, but
they say we can't alienate his
supporters.
Even if we quietly cheer for
somebody else,
we have got to make sure to keep
those people
engaged. They need the turnout
in November
for whoever the Republican
candidate is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump has just
raised the unpredictability
factor enormously, hasn't he,
Tamara?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Yes,
I am pretty sure that we have
predicted many
things that have been wrong over
the last
six months.
Trump just never ceases to
surprise. One thing
that is really interesting in
the numbers
that we have seen in recent
polling is that
his support is very broad-based.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
TAMARA KEITH: It isn't just
people who are
looking for an outsider. He gets
some evangelicals,
some of them. He gets
establishment Republicans.
He get conservative Republicans.
He probably
some independents and Democrats,
too. He is
just -- it's unpredictable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Ted Cruz
presence here,
though, Amy, is another
interesting piece
of this, because he started out
-- you know,
we all know he's the Republican
who the other
Republicans don't necessarily
like that much.
AMY WALTER: Correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he has really
worked this
state. And he's going into this
-- these caucuses
with what appears to be a really
strong organization.
AMY WALTER: He's running the
playbook that
has worked traditionally for
Republicans,
which is hit every single
county, and, as
he said, come here, work the
ground very hard.
He has ground troops here.
He even has a dormitory to host
all of his
volunteers, so they can stay
here and basically
work around the clock. And he
thought by sewing
up the evangelical lane, the
Christian conservative,
social conservative lane, which
makes up anywhere
from 55 percent to 60 percent of
the vote,
that would get him the victory.
The problem, as Tamara pointed
out and as
you have too, is that that
evangelical vote
is much more diffused, that
they're supporting,
many of them, Donald Trump, who
in no way,
shape or form fits the
traditional evangelical
model.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But for Ted Cruz,
Tamara, it's
-- he has to know that Donald
Trump is still
the big story coming out of this
state.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
One way or another, the
headlines are going
to be about Donald Trump. Either
Donald Trump
wins or Donald Trump loses. But
the other
thing is that Ted Cruz really,
with this ground
operation, he raised the
expectations for
himself here in Iowa, especially
because a
previous poll showed him up
pretty significantly.
And Iowa in some way is really
about expectations.
And so, if Ted Cruz comes out of
this and
it's -- and the headline is
Donald Trump wins,
Ted Cruz doesn't live up to
expectations,
or Marco Rubio exceeds
expectations, there
is an expectations game here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about the
Democrats? Let's
talk about Hillary Clinton,
Bernie Sanders.
Amy, it seems to me that she has
honed in
on her message in the last few
weeks in a
way that we didn't see early in
this campaign.
AMY WALTER: Yes, and you have
seen it, too,
with her messaging on the
campaign trail and
somewhat, too, in her
advertising, really
focusing in on, I have been
consistently there
for you, I'm a progressive that
can get things
done, as opposed to a
progressive who has
big grand ideas that are
unlikely to get passed,
and so trying to keep drilling
into that as
much as she can, while not
abandoning the
fact that she sees herself as
liberal as her
opponent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tamara, you and I
were at a
Hillary Clinton event last
night.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it seems to
me that Bernie
Sanders has had a clear -- has
left a clear
impression on -- not only on her
campaign
and the way she's running it,
but on that
message. I mean, she's moved to
the left,
not as far left. She's
distinguishing herself
from him, but it's had a huge
effect on what
she's saying.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
She is definitely and, from
early on, really
emphasized the progressive part
of her message,
and that has continued. One
thing that I think
is really interesting, that I
have been watching
her give her stump speech, well,
for months,
but, in particular, in the last
10 days or
so, her stump speech really
hasn't changed.
She has locked in the message,
that contrast
with Sanders. There is no
frantic changing
of message as the caucuses
approach. There
is a certain confidence in the
way she's moving
forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In these final
days.
TAMARA KEITH: In these final
days. She's just
locked in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where do you --
what do you
see, Amy, in the Sanders camp?
Because, for
him, at one point, he wasn't
give a chance
in this state.
AMY WALTER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now he's very
close.
AMY WALTER: Now he's very close.
And what he's doing right now,
you can see
Bernie Sanders and his campaign
trying to
temper expectations: We don't
necessarily
have to win here to keep going
here.
He has raised a tremendous
amount of money.
What is it, $20 million, just in
this month.
TAMARA KEITH: Twenty million
dollars, yes.
AMY WALTER: So, he has the money
to keep going.
They're advertising already in
the states
that come next, South Carolina,
Nevada, New
Hampshire, and that, if Hillary
Clinton wants
to play the long game, we're
more than happy
to do that, too. We're not going
away just
because we might not get what we
want in Iowa.
And we will hold it close.
The other thing we always
forget, whoever
wins this only gets a handful of
delegates.
This is a teeny, tiny fraction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right. We keep
forgetting to
talk about that.
AMY WALTER: We always forget
about that. And
the delegate game is one that is
going to
take a long time to flesh out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You know, Tamara,
when I heard
him say yesterday that he has
now received
3.2 million different
contributions from Americans,
more than any campaign in
history, I mean,
that really says something,
doesn't it?
TAMARA KEITH: And the average
donation is
$27.
These people are passionate and
they are not
tapped out. They haven't reached
-- they're
not even close to the maximum
that they can
give. And they can just send out
fund-raising
e-mail after fund-raising e-mail
and -- or
texts -- and people will just
send more money
in.
So, he -- his campaign really
believes that
they have the money to push this
forward and
continue into many, many, many
states past
Super Tuesday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just a few
seconds left.
What are you going to remember
this campaign
for?
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy, I know what
you're going
to say.
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: ... very different.
We always talk about, it's all
about the turnout,
but never has it been more
important. Tonight
is the night we're going to find
out if the
Trump phenomenon is real, if he
can turn those
new people out. And we have just
a few more
hours before we get that answer.
Can't wait.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Can we wait?
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tamara?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, in terms of
things I will
remember, I guess it is the --
chasing Hillary
Clinton, trying to figure out
where she was
going to be on that very first
day in Iowa.
And, you know, the Scooby van
that she drove
across country shows up at a
little coffee
shop in Le Claire, and, you
know, we're off
to the races.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will get that
picture and
look at it.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: Feels like a long
time ago.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tamara Keith, Amy
Walter, thank
you both. We will see a lot of
you tonight.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
GWEN IFILL: Now we want to dig
into the numbers
just a bit, not just the
results, but key
facts about Iowa and Iowans.
Hari Sreenivasan breaks it down
-- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thanks, Gwen.
Our data team looked to see
Iowa's track record
in picking winners and how
similar Iowans
are to the rest of the country.
The caucuses
are far from a perfect predictor
of who goes
on to become the party's nominee
or eventually
to the White House.
In fact, for Democrats, it is
slightly better
than flipping a coin. The
caucuses have picked
the candidate correctly 55
percent of the
time. For Republicans, the
process has only
been right 43 percent of the
time.
For example, in 1992,
three-quarters of Iowa
Democrats stood behind longtime
Iowa Senator
Tom Harkin. That year, Bill
Clinton only received
3 percent of the votes, but
later went on
to serve two terms as president.
We do have better indicators
today to which
candidate has been on the minds
of Iowans
in the week leading up to
tonight. Over the
last week, Facebook users in
Iowa had more
to say about Donald Trump than
any other presidential
candidate, Republican or
Democrat. You saw
that same trend nationwide.
Behind Trump on
the Republican side were Ted
Cruz, Marco Rubio,
and Ben Carson. And among
Democrats, Iowans
had the most to say about
Hillary Clinton,
followed by Bernie Sanders and
then Martin
O'Malley.
Of the issues that most
concerned Iowans on
Facebook, crime and criminal
justice, abortion,
taxes and the Affordable Care
Act, there was
only one topic the rest of the
country was
talking about. That's Wall
Street and financial
regulation. According to
Facebook, the rest
of the nation is also talking
about topics
including religion, racism and
discrimination,
jobs and Benghazi.
But who are today's Iowans, and
how do they
compare to the rest of the
country? They register
to vote slightly more than the
rest of the
nation. In 2012, three out of
four Iowans
were registered, vs. two out of
three Americans.
Among Iowans 18 or older, the
state's median
household income is $53,712,
almost exactly
the national average.
And the poverty rate, 11
percent, is also
similar the rest of the United
States. But
there is a significant
difference. And that's
race. According to the census,
about nine
out of 10 Iowans are white.
Nationwide, that
number is far lower, about
two-thirds. Fewer
Latino and African-American
voters call Iowa
home, compared to the rest of
the nation -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Hari.
And on that note, we now turn to
the analysis
of Brooks and Cottle. That's
Michelle Cottle
of "The Atlantic" and David
Brooks, columnist
with The New York Times. Mark
Shields has
been under the weather, but we
look forward
to his full recovery and his
return to our
campaign coverage very soon.
Welcome to both of you.
David Brooks, give me a sense
about -- Charlie
Cook, the great prognosticator
who writes
for The Cook -- of course, runs
The Cook Political
Report, he wrote a story today
about the difference
between emotion and
organization.
In this election, in this
caucus, what are
we seeing?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, we're seeing
emotion both
on the Sanders side and the
Trump side.
You know, I think Trump
revolutionized American
politics, whatever happened
tonight, with
that first debate performance
way back when,
when he started insulting the
looks of other
candidates, insulating the
moderators, live-tweeting
throughout the campaign, calling
people morons
and idiots.
He introduce an entirely new
vocabulary into
American politics, an entirely
different style
of doing politics. He was
inducted into the
Professional Wrestling Hall of
Fame in 2013.
He basically took the
professional wrestling
rhetoric and brought it into
American politics.
And that revved up a lot of
people, a lot
of people who feel shut out, who
feel looked
down upon, who feel resentful or
who just
feel they are not being heard.
Suddenly, it
was the style, it was the
grammar. They felt
that was against political
correctness and
they felt revved up.
The question is, will they turn
out tonight?
If they do, it will be some sort
of historic
night, not only for Trump, but a
change in
the way we think about political
rhetoric
and the way campaigns are run.
GWEN IFILL: So, Michelle,
assuming that all
these rules have gone out the
window, as David
suggests, is that a good thing?
MICHELLE COTTLE: Well, I think
Americans think
it's time to shake up the
political process.
So, I think, whatever happens,
you know, in
the long run with Trump, I think
he's had
an impact and kind of woken up
both parties
as to the dissatisfaction with
how the entire
process was being run. So, I
think it will
go beyond this election, and
even the people
who roll their eyes at him
starting out have
had to kind of go, hmm, well,
he's resonating
on some level.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me ask
you, starting
with you, and then I will turn
to David on
this. Why -- as we watch the
caucusers head
out tonight, why is the
Democratic race so
close?
MICHELLE COTTLE: Well, you know,
the Clintons
have their charms, but Hillary
Clinton has
had a particular problem with
inspiration.
She is not an inspirational
candidate.
And that's kind of what Sanders
is pitching
these days. We were talking
earlier about,
it's not about the issues. It's
kind of more
a tone that's dominating this
race. And Hillary
Clinton has the experience and
the pragmatism
thing down perfectly, but she's
not the hopey,
changey candidate this time
around.
And so despite having really
good organization
and a lot of turnout, Bernie is
the guy who's
making people's hearts go pitter
pat out there.
GWEN IFILL: So, David, whatever
happened to
the Obama coalition that
surprised everybody
in Iowa in 2008?
DAVID BROOKS: The financial
crisis happened,
and a lot of things happened.
I what has happened is, there
has been a tectonic
shift in the landscape of the
American electorate
caused by the financial crisis,
caused by
wage stagnation, caused by the
-- just the
economic strain a lot of people
are under.
And on the Democratic side, that
led to Bernie
Sanders, somebody who said,
we're going to
get government a lot more
radical in helping
the little guy. And the
Republican side, I
think it sort of had the same
deal. Donald
Trump is ideologically
completely inconsistent,
but he's sort of on the side of
the little
guy.
And so a lot of us were reading
all these
sociology books called "Coming
Apart" by Charles
Murray, "Our Kids" by Robert
Putnam of Harvard,
and we were seeing an America
that was bifurcating.
And I think I sort of missed how
that would
affect this campaign, but it is
affecting
the campaign.
GWEN IFILL: Well, David, let me
ask you this.
Is ideology, as you point out --
if Trump
has exploded our idea of
ideology, does that
mean ideology is dead? On the
other hand,
Bernie Trump -- Bernie Trump --
Bernie Sanders
used to be all about ideology.
Does that mean
it's stronger?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it means the
parties are
polarized, because on one side,
you have got
Bernie Sanders calling for a
massive increase
in government. On the other
side, you have
got Ted Cruz calling for a
massive decrease
in government.
So we're splitting apart
ideologically as
well. I don't think ideology is
dead, but
it's being reacted to in
different ways in
the two parties. In the
Democratic Party,
it's an economic -- people want
some economic
change.
In the Republican side, people
want -- they
fear immigrants are driving down
their wages.
They want some cultural change.
They want
a change in authority
structures. So we have
got the fundamental problem
which is being
refracted in two different ways.
GWEN IFILL: Michelle, what is
the -- what
is left for the establishment
bracket, as
we have come to call them, Jeb
Bush, Marco
Rubio, Chris Christie, John
Kasich?
MICHELLE COTTLE: Well, coming
out of tonight,
people are going to be looking
very closely
at how well Rubio does.
Rubio is seen -- right now, he's
trending
a bit in the days running up to
the caucuses.
He's seen as the establishment's
last, best
hope at this point. So, if he
outperforms
expectations, or at least hits
expectations,
then I think you will see people
move to coalesce
around him.
GWEN IFILL: I promise I won't
hold you to
this, except that I will.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: What margin does
someone like
Marco Rubio or even someone like
Bernie Sanders,
what margin is a victory for
them tonight?
MICHELLE COTTLE: Well, I think
if you're looking
at a third-place victory for
Rubio, he needs
to do, you know, better than
middle teens.
He needs middle teens and up.
Anything below
that is going to be seen as a
big disappointment.
Above that, you know, he doesn't
have to win.
He doesn't even have to come in
second. Now,
if he manages to come in second,
there is
going to be a complete uproar.
But, going
forward, if he becomes the guy
who outperformed
or at least hit expectations in
his trending
in Iowa, then you will see the
establishment
kind of coalesce and get excited
about that
possibility.
GWEN IFILL: It's almost -- only
fair that
I hold your feet to the fire on
the same point,
David. What is your -- what
margins are you
watching for tonight?
DAVID BROOKS: First of all, I
think this is
going to be a long campaign, so
this will
be a chapter, not a death knell
for anybody.
But I agree with Michelle. I
think if Rubio's
north of 16, he looks pretty
good. I think
if Cruz is north of 24 or 25, he
looks pretty
good. If Trump is up at 30, if
all his people
show up, then he looks amazing.
And so -- but
I could possibly see Cruz
winning this thing.
We know his voters will turn
out. The Trump
voters are a bit of a mystery.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Go ahead.
DAVID BROOKS: On the Sanders
side, I think
he has got to get north of 43 or
so, and then
he will look pretty good.
GWEN IFILL: You mentioned in
passing -- and
I'm going to ask Michelle about
this -- the
difference between Iowa and
everyplace else.
Going forward, this is a
chapter. It's true.
And, tonight, we're obsessed
with it, but,
tomorrow, we will be obsessed
with New Hampshire
and then down the road. How
different is Iowa
than the rest of the country as
we go forward
in this process?
MICHELLE COTTLE: Well, Iowa is
-- as we have
noted, it's very white, it's
rural, it's older
voters. It's also -- its
Democratic electorate
is very liberal.
Those quants at FiveThirtyEight
crunched the
numbers and found the three best
states in
the country for Bernie Sanders
is Vermont,
Iowa and New Hampshire. And then
after that,
you can't really win the
Democratic primary
if you can't talk to nonwhite
voters. And
so it's going to be very -- it's
going to
shift dramatically once we're
past this for
the Democrats.
GWEN IFILL: But Hillary Clinton
has been to
Iowa on her behalf or her
husband's behalf
for a long time. Why is this --
why is he
such a real challenge to her? Is
it because
she has tied herself so closely
to the president
or something else?
MICHELLE COTTLE: Well, it's a
couple of things.
One, the numbers have been
thrown around.
There's a big chunk of Iowa
Democratic caucus-goers
that consider themselves
socialists. They're
more liberal. The Clintons are
not the left
wing of the party. They also
don't talk in
terms of revolution.
So, temperamentally, the
zeitgeist just isn't
there. In 2008, there was much
talk about
how the organization wasn't
there and Hillary
didn't spend enough time in the
state. This
time, she has tried to remedy
that. But there
is also still this sense that
she's not as
down and removed. There's too
much security,
there's too much structure.
I have talked to Iowa voters who
complain
that, when they go to her
events, they can't
really get close to her. So,
it's just -- it's
a combination of things that
make it tough
for her. But it's one state and
it's a state
that's tiny and we will move on.
GWEN IFILL: Well, David, it's
almost become
-- we're exploding conventional
wisdom left
and right tonight, but one of
the pieces of
conventional wisdom involving
Hillary Clinton
is that it's just her moment
isn't quite there,
that she hasn't connected, that
things like
these e-mails have raised such a
dust that
it makes people think, I don't
know if I trust
her.
Is that something that is just
unique to the
early voting states?
DAVID BROOKS: It's a drag on
her, but I would
just point out that, eight years
ago, she
got a lot better after a defeat,
got a lot
better as a candidate. I would
also point
out that, when her husband ran
in 1992 -- I
forget the exact numbers -- he
lost a ton
of the first 10 contests.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: This thing can go
on, and she
will get better.
She hasn't found a focus yet,
the way Sanders
has a focus. He was born with a
focus. She
has not found it. But I wouldn't
be surprised
if in a month or two, she's
honed on something
just caused by the pressure of
defeat, the
near-death experience.
GWEN IFILL: And I wanted to
circle back to
the establishment question with
you, David,
because, as we speak tonight,
none of -- I
think Jeb Bush, and Chris
Christie and John
Kasich are all already in New
Hampshire.
They have already -- John Kasich
said, ah,
I'm moving on. Is that -- we
have seen people
survive after losing in Iowa,
obviously. Is
that possible for Republicans as
well in this
environment?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, totally.
Rick Santorum won here. Mike
Huckabee won
here. This can nominate -- this
can sometimes
give -- hand victory to people
who don't move
on. And so for a Chris Christie,
there was
never going to be a good kind of
place. So,
we will be sitting here in
April, I think,
still talking about this race,
especially
on the Republican side. So they
still have
decent shots.
GWEN IFILL: We will be sitting
here in April,
Michelle?
(LAUGHTER)
MICHELLE COTTLE: We will be
sitting here in
April talking about this.
GWEN IFILL: We will be sitting
here.
MICHELLE COTTLE: We will just
know a lot more
by then.
It's going to be fascinating to
see what the
Trump story coming out of Iowa
is, because
it's going to be about Trump, no
matter whether
win, lose or draw.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
MICHELLE COTTLE: But, you know,
come April,
we will have a lot more votes
having passed,
and the story will be completely
different.
GWEN IFILL: Michelle Cottle of
"The Atlantic,"
thank you for joining us
tonight, and David
Brooks. We will talk to you all
night long.
MICHELLE COTTLE: Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: As we wait for
voters to finally
have their say, political
director Lisa Desjardins
joins us now to share what she's
watching
for and what you, too, can watch
for later
tonight.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
GWEN IFILL: So, Lisa, what's
your secret things
of list you're watching for?
LISA DESJARDINS: Got my charts.
I got my maps.
I'm excited in real time to sort
out what's
going on. And I think this will
bring together
everything we have heard on the
program tonight.
Let's start with the Republicans
and what
to watch for.
If you look at a map of Iowa,
you can see
four basic areas where you
should watch for
Republicans. These are areas
where there are
a lot of Republicans show up.
GWEN IFILL: Oh, look, we have a
map of Iowa.
LISA DESJARDINS: Look at this. I
love television.
If you look in the upper
northwest corner,
that is a conservative hotbed.
That is an
area where you would expect a
Ted Cruz needing
to do well. Now, if you look
closer to Des
Moines, then you see areas where
it's less
conservative, but there are more
people. And
that's an area where, say, Mitt
Romney did
well four years ago, because he
got out a
lot of people, they didn't feel
strongly about
him, but a lot of them showed
up.
This sort of correlates. If you
look at the
political divide in the
Republican Party,
you see this conservative vs.
moderate trend
in Iowa. There, you see in the
brighter red
kind of the Mitt Romney or Ron
Paul groups.
Those are bigger cities.
And as much as Hari talked about
the lack
of racial diversity compared to
the rest of
the country in Iowa, they do
share with the
rest of the country, Iowans, a
common divide
in America, which is urban vs.
rural. And
I think you will see that
tonight play out
in the Republican Party. It will
be close
to watch.
GWEN IFILL: So, you take the
same formula
and apply it to the Democratic
Party, what
does that map look like?
LISA DESJARDINS: So glad you
asked.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
LISA DESJARDINS: I think we have
a map for
that.
I think, with Democrats, the key
is to watch
education centers, higher
education centers.
Iowa has many of them, if you
look at the
University of Northern Iowa,
University of
Iowa. I'm interested in
particular in the
Des Moines area. There is a huge
community
college there. These are all
places, Gwen,
where Bernie Sanders needs to
get out his
vote.
If we see large voter turnout,
speaking to
Amy's point earlier in Politics
Monday, that's
a sign that Bernie Sanders is
going to have
a big night. Now, if these
places with young
populations do not have large
turnout for
the Democrat, that's a good sign
for Hillary
Clinton.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Sorry.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Which one of these
candidates
is exploiting those metrics the
most efficiently
at this point?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, we will
see tonight,
but I think, in the Democratic
side, there
is a sense that Hillary Clinton
has a more
data-driven operation, that she
has identified
her voters, that she is the one
more likely
to get them out.
Now, Bernie Sanders is counting
on people
coming to show up who he doesn't
know. Maybe
they're just coming because they
believe him
in, same kind of voters who
surprised everyone
in the thousands by showing up
at his rallies.
On the Republican side, Ted Cruz
is playing
that role of the data wizard.
And we will
see. He's had a rough last
weekend. We will
see if that holds up.
GWEN IFILL: Late night tonight,
Lisa?
(LAUGHTER)
LISA DESJARDINS: Oh, yes. And I
was up for
the whole nine yards last time.
One reason it might be a little
faster, Gwen,
though, is an app -- imagine,
technology.
Now the Republican and
Democratic parties
are both using an app so that
caucus organizers
will hit their phone with the
numbers of votes.
It even rejects what they enter
if it doesn't
add up correctly.
GWEN IFILL: Oh.
LISA DESJARDINS: So, we may be
getting more
real-time numbers. Republicans,
we expect
first. The Democrats, they
usually take longer.
GWEN IFILL: Well, you can always
spend another
night staring at your phone.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yay.
GWEN IFILL: And that's what we
will be doing.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Thanks very much,
Lisa. Talk to
you later.
LISA DESJARDINS: Great.
GWEN IFILL: Curious about how
the caucuses
actually work? Well, we have got
you covered.
Check out our helpful explainer
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now back to Judy in Iowa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We close out,
Gwen, with a
look at the deep divides that
have opened
up inside the Republican Party
in this election,
and a fight over core
conservative principles.
Our report is part of a
collaboration with
"The Atlantic."
DAVID FRUM, Former Speechwriter
for Former
President George W. Bush: The
great debate
that's been going on inside the
Republican
world since 2012 is, do we need
to change
the pizza or do we need to
change the pizza
box?
EZRA KLEIN, Editor in Chief,
Vox: The Republican
Party is riven by very real
disagreements
that it doesn't actually have a
mechanism
for solving.
BILL KRISTOL, Editor, The Weekly
Standard:
As a conservative, why would one
support Donald
Trump? There's just no evidence
of any history
of belief in conservative
principles, of commitment
to conservative causes.
JIM DEMINT (R), Former U.S.
Senator: Whether
it's Trump or Cruz or several
others, if you
hear someone say something, a
lot of us will
say, well, I wouldn't have said
that, but
I'm glad somebody said it.
ERIC CANTOR (R-VA), Former House
Majority
Leader: Our party has taken an
anger detour
that is evident every day when
we look at
the news and watch the polls.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Frum, your
article in
"The Atlantic" is "The Great
Republican Revolt."
So, boil it down for us. Who's
revolting,
against whom and why?
DAVID FRUM: The Republican Party
had planned
a dynastic succession for 2016.
One Bush would
follow smoothly after another
Bush. Everything
was positioned for this Jeb Bush
succession.
And, instead, the Republican
Party got a class
war.
BILL KRISTOL: When you look back
at 2012,
it's pretty amazing that the
Republican Party
nominated a very wealthy
Republican who had,
in Massachusetts, done a version
of Obamacare,
as their nominee, in a party
that hated Obamacare,
that was unhappy about
Republican elites,
as well as Democratic elites.
DAVID FRUM: They believed Mitt
Romney was
going to win. And he didn't.
That was a big
shock and surprise. The
Republican elite,
the donors, the members of
Congress, had collectively
done an analysis of what they
believed had
gone wrong in 2012.
The only thing the party had
done wrong was,
it had not been open enough on
immigration.
Fix that, and everything would
fall into place.
EZRA KLEIN: That was the theory.
That was
a plan. And that's why you begin
by having,
right after the 2012 election, a
very serious
effort, including many top
Republicans, like
Marco Rubio, John McCain, to
push immigration
reform.
Of course, that dies in the
House, because
rank-and-file Republicans and
conservatives
on talk radio actually didn't
want immigration
reform.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ezra Klein,
you're the editor
in chief of the news and
analysis Web site
Vox.
Is immigration the chief issue
you see dividing
the party?
EZRA KLEIN: I think a lot of
these issues,
trade, immigration, they have a
real subtext
of economic insecurity.
We're in a place right now as a
country where
the demographic changes that
we're going through
are significant and they are
fast, not just
with immigration, but with
relative birth
rates and other things in recent
years. So
we're just about to hit the
point where a
majority of infants are
minority.
We're sort of a
majority-minority nation if
you're under 3 years old. That
is a profound
change for people to live
through. And I think
it's a change that the political
system doesn't
really know how to talk about or
doesn't -- and,
for that matter, frankly doesn't
want to talk
about.
DAVID FRUM: When you ask the
question, do
you think you will be better off
in 10 years
than you are today, do you think
your children
will have a better life than
you, the most
pessimistic group in America are
whites without
a college degree. And the second
most pessimistic
group in America are whites with
a college
degree.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, into this
situation steps
New York billionaire Donald
Trump. What happens?
DAVID FRUM: Donald Trump is one
of America's
great marketing geniuses. And
Trump has, as
great marketers do, an intuitive
understanding
of what the customer wants.
So, he saw this opportunity. In
the spring
of 2015, if you asked
Republicans, you gave
them a straight binary choice,
what do you
want to do with illegal
immigrants, do you
want to somehow legalize them,
or do you want
to deport them, you made the
choice that stark,
what you saw was a majority,
more Republicans
said deport than legalize.
So, the great marketer came
along and said,
I see a niche. I see a niche.
And it's the
bigger niche. And I can have it
all to myself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bill Kristol,
you're the editor
of The Weekly Standard, a
longtime leading
voice among the neoconservatives
in this country.
You have said that if the
Republicans nominate
Donald Trump for president,
you're ready to
support a third party. Is that
still your
position?
BILL KRISTOL: It is. I suppose I
should leave
the door a little bit open,
because who knows
what the world would look like
in June or
July if that were to happen,
what Trump would
have said, what positions he
would have taken.
But, at the end of the day,
could you trust
him to appoint constitutional
Supreme Court
judges? Could you trust him to
be serious
about limiting the scope of
government? Trump
just seems to have no interest
in any of that.
EZRA KLEIN: Trump, unlike a lot
of Republicans,
says he's going to protect
Medicare, protect
Social Security, that he
believes in the government.
He's not here to cut your
government programs.
What he's here to do is make
sure the government
is helping you, the downscale,
economically
struggling white voter.
And this money's not going to be
going to
immigrants who are flooding
across a border
to take advantage of our
generosity. And that,
for a particular part of the
party, is very
appealing. And for other parts
of the party,
it's really noxious.
DAVID FRUM: Even now, about
two-thirds of
Republicans find Trump
unacceptable. He is
unpopular with the more
affluent, the more
educated and the more religious
within the
Republican Party. And those are
the people
who usually do tend to prevail
in Republican
contests.
BILL KRISTOL: A lot of the
conventional view
is -- just lumps Cruz and Trump
together.
But I think Cruz and Trump are
very different.
And it's not an accident that
they're now
fighting a big war.
Cruz, people can like him,
dislike him. At
the end of the day, Cruz clerked
for the chief
justice of the United States.
Cruz has argued
many cases in the Supreme Court.
Cruz wants
a very conservative form of
limited government,
constitutionalism and so forth.
And that's
really what his -- the agenda
he's believed
in for 20 years is all about.
It's very different from Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what happens
to the Tea
Party in all this? We don't hear
about the
Tea Party, per se.
BILL KRISTOL: I think Trump has
done a pretty
good job of hijacking, in a way,
the Tea Party
impetus, and, in my view, in an
unhealthy
way.
That is, I think the Tea Party
believed in
constitutional government. It
was trying to
re-limit government. It was --
it hated Obamacare.
It didn't like the bailouts
there are good
reasons not to like.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jim DeMint,
you're the former
senator from South Carolina.
You're the president
of the Heritage Foundation. Some
call you
the godfather of the Tea Party
movement.
(LAUGHTER)
JIM DEMINT: OK.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How did you get
that designation?
JIM DEMINT: I finally saw we
weren't going
to change the system with the
same people
who were there.
And I went out across the
country and began
to try to help primary opponents
to Republican
establishment candidates. And
the country
rose up in 2010, put a lot of
new people in
the House and the Senate. And
there were a
lot of complaints by the
establishment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Eric Cantor, it
was 2014. You
were the majority leader of the
House, presumed
to be the next speaker of the
House of Representatives.
You lost a primary battle to an
unknown economics
professor, Dave Brat, a member
of the Tea
Party.
Now, with the passage of time,
do you better
understand what happened?
ERIC CANTOR: Certainly, there
were a lot of
factors at work. And I do think,
though, very
much, if you look at what is
going on today,
was a real anger out there on
the part of
a lot of people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you think
is the source
of the anger?
ERIC CANTOR: That real anger out
there in
the grassroots, when people
would go home
and there would be layoffs, and
wage-earners
in their 40s and 50s who say,
hey, wait a
minute, what happened to my job,
and then
didn't have the skills to go
find another
job, members of Congress going
home and seeing
that, and saying, hey,
something's broken.
And then that again compounds
itself, which
leads some people to say, hey,
wait a minute,
we got to throw it all out and
go to the extreme,
because we are in that bad of a
situation.
JIM DEMINT: In 2010, this wave
of Tea Party
sent a whole new group to
Washington. Nothing
happened. 2012, the Republican
Party took
back -- they pushed the Tea
Party out. They
tried to run the presidential
race with Karl
Rove and other top-down
approach. And it was
a disaster.
But, in 2014, the candidates
were back out
there for the Senate and the
House campaigning
on, OK, we're going to do it
this time. Give
us a majority in the Senate.
Nothing happened
after they got the majority.
And so what you see now is
people basically
saying, the heck with these
guys. It doesn't
matter what they promise.
They're not going
to do anything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You had what
happened to Eric
Cantor in 2014.
JIM DEMINT: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then, last
year, the downfall
of -- or the resignation of
Speaker Boehner.
What's been going on in the
House of Representatives?
JIM DEMINT: John Boehner, who we
used to be
friends, but he saw
conservatives and this
idea of limited government as
more of an obstacle
and a frustration. And he
punished conservatives
who really tried to push for
some fairly simple
things.
What John Boehner found is, he
couldn't crush
the conservatives, but he -- but
he made it
painful for them.
ERIC CANTOR: When you hear
people say, hey,
you aren't trying hard enough,
you didn't
shut the government down, you
didn't allow
the government to go into
default, I mean,
these are all things that, to
me, so counterintuitive.
I mean, nobody understands what
that would
really mean if you went into
default, and
all the people that could
potentially get
hurt.
People will say, yes, things are
that bad,
go ahead, and just blow it all
up, so we can
reconstitute it.
EZRA KLEIN: This is part of the
problem for
the Republican Party, and
particularly for
the Republican base. They will
run elections
based on these promises of deep
confrontation
and tremendous results.
And then, once in office, they
can't deliver
on that much, because the
American system
of government requires a lot of
compromise
and a lot of consensus for
anything to get
done. That leads to a cycle of
disillusionment
within the Republican base,
because they feel
they voted for these
politicians. These politicians
made clear promises. They didn't
deliver on
the promises.
But one thing that has become, I
think, really
toxic is the way the base tends
to interpret
that disappointment, is that the
real issue
is that the politicians went and
got bought
by Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do moderates have
a place in
the Republican Party?
DAVID FRUM: The most important
kind of moderation
that's needed is Republicans
need to preach
respect for the work and the
institutions
of government. The government
has to be made
to work.
The government is -- I think all
Republicans
agree, is too expensive. But
that doesn't
mean that we'd be better off
without one,
or that you want to destroy the
traditional
agreements and understandings
that make the
American government work.
Republicans have really stressed
those since
2009, and that's been dangerous.
So, we have
to rediscover some respect for
the institutions
of government, and also accept
that, in a
democracy, you don't get all --
your way all
the time. And it's not a failure
of the system
if you do not win every
particular argument.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: As you
may have discovered, it may be a
long night.
You can always get the latest
results from
Iowa right on our home page.
And while you're there, check
out our election
calendar, with upcoming debates
and primaries.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Join us at 11:00
p.m. Eastern
for special live coverage of the
presidential
caucuses here in Iowa.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.